[MUSIC]
>> Rachel Nabors: So
with all this state going around,
isn't it hard to keep track of it?
Yes, yes, it is.
On rachelnabors.com, I store whether or
not the sidebar is open.
So that when people come back,
the sidebar is either open or
closed depending on where they go.
Notice that they left it closed.
They bounced over to the site.
Now they're gonna go back to my site and
it's still closed.
[SOUND] How did I do that?
I am using local storage to
remember where they were.
And then I'm using that to a set a class
of sidebar opened on the main page or
sidebar closed.
Now for this feed taking care of
Rachel thing, this pet Rachel.
I was using JavaScript to keep track of
what her state should be like at any time.
But I was storing how she
should look with CSS.
And there's a difference between what
something is and how it should look.
And this made a lot of sense when I
was developing this with CSS in mind.
However, the client project used SVG.
And SVG is best animated with
a library at this point called GSAP.
Because GSAP also does a really
good job of normalizing
SVG behaviors across browsers.
SVG can behave a little
weird in certain browsers.
So for backwards compatibility and
cross-browser normalization, we decided
it would be a good idea to go with GSAP.
If you want to learn more
about SVG animation and
GSAP, Sarah Drasner has a lovely
course with Frontend Masters.
Which is probably a great place to start.
So this is what my code started
looking like once I started
trying to control all of the animations
and the states with JavaScript.
And it started getting pretty big.
What I had in a couple of
states started blimping out.
So perhaps it would have been different
if I'd come into this project thinking in
terms of making my states
displaying with both.
[LAUGH] Perhaps it would
have been better if I had
been working with JavaScript
from the beginning.
And hadn't built this prototype
using CSS and JavaScript together.
Because I grew lazy.
I was relying on CSS to remember
what the state should look like.
I was taking advantage of that.
You get state handling for free with CSS.
If the class is there,
it should be like this.
If the class is not there, go do the thing
that was in the cascade before it.
CSS gives you a lot of freebies like that.
And I learned that what's good for
the declarative CSS Goose is not always so
great for
the functional JavaScript Gander.
So keep in mind, if you're doing
state-based animations just
with JavaScript, you might have
a more difficult time of it.
>> Speaker 2: Before we move on.
>> Rachel Nabors: Yes?
>> Speaker 2: I have another
question from Philippe.
>> Rachel Nabors: All right.
>> Speaker 2: Is SVG animation
supported with CSS on IE Edge?
>> Rachel Nabors: Yes, so
the interesting thing with SVG is
that SVG is a bunch of DOM elements.
It's a specific way of
writing DOM elements.
So, it's the same as a div or a p tag.
You've just got an SVG
with a g tag inside it.
And you can animate it the same
way you animate those things.
There are a couple of different
properties that SVGs have.
Like outlines and such that you won't
find in your regular old p tags, etc.
The issue with animating SVG with CSS is
figuring out which of those properties
are animatable in which browsers.
In fact, some of them,
like in the olden days, the g tag for
some browsers was not animatable.
So don't bother trying to
animate anything on the g tag.
But more and more browsers are making
those SVG elements animatable with CSS.
So you don't have to go in there and
manipulate them directly with JavaScript.
It's a bit confusing because
we tend to think about SVG
animation as being something
different from CSS animation.
There is an SVG language, SMIL,
made specifically for animating SVG.
It's also called smile,
that's how you pronounce it.
Downside to SMIL is that it is
currently deprecated in Chrome.
And Chrome was like the big pusher for
everyone should use SMIL.
And it's the whole reason we have a web
animations API was so that browsers
could write the animation rules for CSS
and transitions and animations and SMIL.
And incorporate them
all with this one API.
And it would rule them all and
everything would be awesome.
But then SMIL got deprecated,
but we still have this API.
So maybe one day, it will come back.
But in the meantime,
we animate SVG with CSS.
And sometimes, browsers are buggy.
And yes, I can animate a g tag or
I can animate that SVG property.
GSAP normalizes that kind of behavior.
It's a crying shame,
browsers should have more pride.
>> Rachel Nabors: So good question.
I hope I managed to clarify that.
I'm sure in the future,
before I move on here, browsers will
have normalized their abilities
to animate and display SVG.
Such that we will have sites like
you might not need GSAP the same
way we have sites like you
might not need jQuery.
Because there was a time when
selecting things without jQuery
was a pain in the butt.
Then jQuery came along,
showed browsers how to do it.
Browsers got on their game and
gave us better selectors for going out and
manipulating JavaScript.
By tag, by element, by ID,
by class, etc, more natural syntax.
So this is the same thing that we're
seeing with CSS animations and
with the web animation API coming up.
In the future, hopefully,
browsers will all work as well.
And we'll all be very performant.
And we won't have to worry so
much about handling those buggy browsers.
But until then, for
mission critical projects,
you might want to check GSAP for your SVG.
>> Rachel Nabors: So libraries for
managing those state.
If you use JavaScript for
complex stateful animation.
You'll probably want to implement
some sort of a state machine strapped
separately to keep track of that,
or you might struggle a lot.
No CSS free rides,
although this could act.
This is JavaScript Finite State Machine,
which handles linear
state transitions easily.
But many-to-many states get complicated.
I've actually found many-to-many
states are what CSS excels at.
It handles any change just like that.
I get that, I totally understand,
I'll just check the cascade.
And there's also jStorage.
JStorage is what I'm using to stash
values in localStorage on my site.
It's great for helping me store state
when people might leave the site and
then come back.
This is really good if you have
people who are going off site.
And you want to make that transition
a little bit easier for them.
And keep track of where they were.
And it's library agnostic as a bonus.